docs: add documentation for node local traffic (#1947)
kyma-project/telemetry-manager: docs/contributor/pocs/node-local-traffic/node-local-traffic.md

# Service with local traffic policy

> The PoC tries to understand the behavior of the OTLP push service with [service internal traffic policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-traffic-policy/#using-service-internal-traffic-policy). The gateways

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The PoC tries to understand the behavior of the OTLP push service with [service internal traffic policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-traffic-policy/#using-service-internal-traffic-policy).
```

> in Kyma Telemetry are exposed via OTLP service eg: `telemetry-otlp-traces`. the

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The gateways in Kyma Telemetry are exposed using an OTLP service such as `telemetry-otlp-traces`.
```

> applications running in the cluster will push the telemetry data to this service. This PoC tests the behaviour when this OTLP 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The applications running in the cluster will push the telemetry data to this service. This PoC tests the behaviour when this OTLP push service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`.
```

> push service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`. Following criteria were tested:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following criteria were tested:
```

> - If the data is only sent to the daemonSet running on the same node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node
```

> - If the daemonSet for some reason is not running then is the data sent to a daemonSet running on a different node

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- If the DaemonSet is not running, then is the data sent to a DaemonSet running on a different node
```
Is this a question? "Is it sent to another DaemonSet?" If not, change where the "is" is in the sentence.

## Setup

> For the setup we deployed following:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
We deployed the following components:
```

> - A [trace generator and sink](./trace-gen.yaml)

Reviewer: either use an article in both lines, or none.

```suggestion
- [Trace generator and sink](./trace-gen.yaml)
```

- Trace Agent [Setup](./trace-agent.yaml)

## Tests

> Tests were performed in following way:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Tests were performed in the following way:
```

> ### Pre-requisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion
### Prerequisites
```

- Deployed the trace agent with service `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`

> - Deployed the trace generator and sink. Where trace generator would push traces to `telemetry-otlp-traces-local.kyma-system:4317`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Deployed the trace generator and sink, with the trace generator pushing traces to `telemetry-otlp-traces-local.kyma-system:4317`
```

### Verifications

> - The traces are only pushed to the daemonSet running on the same node as the trace generator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- The traces are only pushed to the DaemonSet running on the same node as the trace generator.
```

> - When the daemonSet is in CrashloopBackoff or in Error state, the traces should not be pushed to the backend.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- When the DaemonSet is in CrashloopBackoff or in Error state, the traces should not be pushed to the backend.
```

>   - To simulate failure the configmap was introduced with broken config and the daemonSet was restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - To simulate failure, the configmap was introduced with broken config and the DaemonSet was restarted.
```

### Results

|       | Trace Generator | Trace Sink | Comments                                                                                                                        |
|-------|-----------------|------------|---------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|

> | Istio | disabled        | enabled    | - Peer authentication is required <br> - Data is sent pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running then data is not received |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Istio | disabled        | enabled    | - Peer authentication is required <br> - Data is sent [ADD PREPOSITION] pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running, then data is not received |
```

Is the data sent **to** the pod or **from** the pod or **by** the pod? Add the correct preposition - here and in the following lines.

> | Istio | enabled         | enabled    | - Data is sent pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running then data is not received                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Istio | enabled         | enabled    | - Data is sent [ADD PREPOSITION] pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running, then data is not received                                        |
```

> | Istio | disabled        | disabled   | - Data is sent pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running then data is not received                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Istio | disabled        | disabled   | - Data is sent [ADD PREPOSITION] pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running, then data is not received                                        |
```

> | Istio | disabled        | disabled    | - Data is sent to the  Trace Agent on same node <br> - When Trace Agent is not running, then data is not received                                       |

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
| Istio | disabled        | disabled    | - Data is sent to the Trace Agent on same node <br> - When Trace Agent is not running, then data is not received                                       |
```

> | Istio | enabled         | disabled   | - Data is sent pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running then data is not received                                        |

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Istio | enabled         | disabled   | - Data is sent [ADD PREPOSITION] pod on same node <br> - When pod is not running, then data is not received                                        |
```

### Summary

> When Service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local` then the data is only sent to the daemonSet running on the same node. If the daemonSet is not running then the data is not sent to the daemonSet running on a different node. If the

Reviewer: Who is "Service"? The OTLP push service?

```suggestion
If [WHICH?] Service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`, then the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node. If the DaemonSet is not running, then the data is not sent to the DaemonSet running on a different node.
```

> daemonSet is in CrashloopBackoff or in Error state then the data is not sent to a different daemonSet running on the different node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If the DaemonSet is in CrashloopBackoff or in Error state, then the data is not sent to a different DaemonSet running on the different node.
```

So, in both cases data is not sent to a different DaemonSet on another node? 
Are there cases when it is sent to a different DaemonSet on another node? Is that the desired outcome or not?

Author: Desired behaviour is that it should not send data to DaemonSet located on another node. If the DaemonSet is in Error State then the client should not be able to push the data.

The gateways in Kyma Telemetry are exposed using an OTLP service such as `telemetry-otlp-traces`.
The applications running in the cluster will push the telemetry data to this service. This PoC tests the behaviour when this OTLP push service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`.
The following criteria were tested:
- If the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node
- If the DaemonSet is not running, then is the data sent to a DaemonSet running on a different node

## Setup

We deployed the following components:
- [Trace generator and sink](./trace-gen.yaml)
- Trace Agent DaemonSet [Setup](./trace-agent.yaml)

## Tests
Tests were performed in the following way:
### Prerequisites
- Deployed the trace agent with service `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`
- Deployed the trace generator and sink, with the trace generator pushing traces to `telemetry-otlp-traces-local.kyma-system:4317`

### Verifications
- The traces are only pushed to the DaemonSet running on the same node as the trace generator.
- When the DaemonSet is in CrashloopBackoff or in Error state, the traces should not be pushed to the backend.

>   - To simulate failure, the configmap was introduced with broken config and the DaemonSet was restarted.

Reviewer: Is this indented by purpose?
If yes, why?

>   - To simulate failure, the configmap was introduced with broken config and the DaemonSet was restarted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  - To simulate failure, the ConfigMap was introduced with broken config and the DaemonSet was restarted.
```

# Service with local traffic policy

The PoC tries to understand the behavior of the OTLP push service with [service internal traffic policy](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/service-traffic-policy/#using-service-internal-traffic-policy).
The gateways in Kyma Telemetry are exposed using an OTLP service such as `telemetry-otlp-traces`.
The applications running in the cluster will push the telemetry data to this service. This PoC tests the behaviour when this OTLP push service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`.
The following criteria were tested:
- If the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node
- If the DaemonSet is not running, then is the data sent to a DaemonSet running on a different node

## Setup

We deployed the following components:
- [Trace generator and sink](./trace-gen.yaml)

> - Trace Agent Daemon set [Setup](./trace-agent.yaml)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Trace Agent DaemonSet [Setup](./trace-agent.yaml)
```

### Results

| Trace Generator | Trace Agent    | Data is Sent to Trace Agent running on the same Node | Data is not received at Sink when Trace Agent is not running | comments                        |
|-----------------|----------------|------------------------------------------------------|--------------------------------------------------------------|---------------------------------|
| Istio disabled  | Istio enabled  | yes                                                  | yes                                                          | Peer authentication is required |
| Istio  enabled  | Istio enabled  | yes                                                  | yes                                                          |                                 |
| Istio disabled  | Istio disabled | yes                                                  | yes                                                          |                                 |
| Istio enabled   | Istio disabled | yes                                                  | yes                                                          |                                 |

### Security

> While performing the PoC we also tried to understand from the perspective of security. As when the communication is within the same node would it be more secure ? Following is the result of investigation:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
While performing the PoC, we also investigated security aspects; for example, whether it's more secure when the communication is within the same node. 
See the following conclusions:
```

> To enable Pod-to-Pod communication K8s is creating a virtual network interface in the root network namespace of the node. The virtual interfaces are connected via a virtual network bridge (see https://opensource.com/article/22/6/kubernetes-networking-fundamentals). The connections inside the cluster are always point-to-point connections between the communiation partners. Because of this, the network traffic between Pods cannot be traced easily by a 3rd Pod which is not part of that communication. In order to intercept this traffic, an attacker must have access to the root network namespace of the node or must be able to add a man in the middle between 2 communication partners. This makes it pretty difficult to trace the network communication of 2 Pods on the same node. If the Pods are on 2 different Nodes, an attacker could trace the network traffic between the Pods because the Node-to-Node connection is not encrypted.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To enable Pod-to-Pod communication, Kubernetes creates a virtual network interface in the root network namespace of the node. The virtual interfaces are connected with a virtual network bridge (see https://opensource.com/article/22/6/kubernetes-networking-fundamentals). The connections inside the cluster are always point-to-point connections between the communication partners. Because of this, the network traffic between Pods cannot be traced easily by a third Pod that's not part of that communication. To intercept this traffic, an attacker must have access to the root network namespace of the node or must be able to add a man in the middle between two communication partners. This makes it pretty difficult to trace the network communication of two Pods on the same node. If the Pods are on two different nodes, an attacker could trace the network traffic between the Pods because the node-to-node connection is not encrypted.
```

["Node" is one of the terms we're supposed to capitalize](https://github.com/kyma-project/community/blob/main/docs/guidelines/content-guidelines/02-style-and-terminology.md#camelcase). In this doc, you did that nowhere before, so for the sake of consistency, I suggest we keep it lower case here too.
Ideally, write it correctly everywhere instead.

> Taking the above results into account, the potential risk of a data breach is low.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Based on these investigation results, the potential risk of a data breach is low.
```

### Summary

> When OTLP Service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`, then the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node. If the DaemonSet is not running, then the data is not sent to the DaemonSet running on a different node.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When the OTLP Service is configured with `internalTrafficPolicy: Local`, then the data is only sent to the DaemonSet running on the same node. If the DaemonSet is not running, then the data is not sent to the DaemonSet running on a different node.
```
